This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
1
Chapter1In this chapter:
• What Is Swing?
• Swing Features
• Swing Packages and Classes
• The Model-View-Controller
Architecture
• Working with Swing
• The Swing Set Demo
• Reading This Book
CHAPTER 1
Introducing Swing
Welcome to Swing! By now, you’re probably wondering what Swing is and how you
can use it to spice up your Java applications. Or perhaps you’re curious as to how
the Swing components fit into the overall Java strategy. Then again, maybe you just
want to see what all the hype is about. Well, you’ve come to the right place; this
book is all about Swing and its components. So let’s dive right in and answer the first
question that you’re probably asking right now, which is…
What Is Swing?
If you poke around the Java home page (http://java.sun.com/), you’ll find Swing
described as a set of customizable graphical components whose look-and-feel (L&F)
can be dictated at runtime. In reality, however, Swing is much more than this. Swing
is the next-generation GUI toolkit that Sun Microsystems created to enable enter-
prise development in Java. Byenterprise development, we mean that programmers
can use Swing to create large-scale Java applications with a wide array of powerful
components. In addition, you can easily extend or modify these components to con-
trol their appearance and behavior.
Swing is not an acronym. The name represents the collaborative choice of its design-
ers when the project was kicked off in late 1996. Swing is actually part of a larger
family of Java products known as the Java Foundation Classes (JFC), which incorpo-
rate many of the features of Netscape’s Internet Foundation Classes (IFC) as well as
design aspects from IBM’s Taligent division and Lighthouse Design. Swing has been
in active development since the beta period of the Java Development Kit (JDK) 1.1,
circa spring of 1997. The Swing APIs entered beta in the latter half of 1997 and were
initially released in March 1998. When released, the Swing 1.0 libraries contained
nearly 250 classes and 80 interfaces. Growth has continued since then: at press time,
Swing 1.4 contains 85 public interfaces and 451 public classes.
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
2 | Chapter 1: Introducing Swing
Although Swing was developed separately from the core Java Development Kit, it
doesrequireatleastJDK1.1.5torun.Swingbuildsontheeventmodelintroducedin
the 1.1 series of JDKs; you cannot use the Swing libraries with the older JDK 1.0.2.
In addition, you must have a Java 1.1–enabled browser to support Swing applets.
The Java 2SDK 1.4 release includes many updated Swing classes and a few new fea-
tures. Swing is fully integrated into both the developer’s kit and the runtime environ-
ment of all Java 2 releases (SDK 1.2 and higher), including the Java Plug-In.
What Are the Java Foundation Classes?
The FC is a suite of libraries designed to assist programmers in creating enterprise
applications with Java. The Swing API is only one of five libraries that make up the
JFC. The JFC also consists of the Abstract Window Toolkit (AWT), the Accessibil-
ity API, the 2D API, and enhanced support for Drag and Drop capabilities. While the
Swing API is the primary focus of this book, here is a brief introduction to the other
elements in the JFC:
AWT
The Abstract Window Toolkit is the basic GUI toolkit shipped with all versions
of the Java Development Kit. While Swing does not reuse any of the older AWT
components, it does build on the lightweight component facilities introduced in
AWT 1.1.
Accessibility
The accessibility package provides assistance to users who have trouble with tra-
ditional user interfaces. Accessibility tools can be used in conjunction with
devices such as audible text readers or braille keyboards to allow direct access to
the Swing components. Accessibility is split into two parts: the Accessibility API,
which is shipped with the Swing distribution, and the Accessibility Utilities API,
which is distributed separately. All Swing components support accessibility, so
this book dedicates an entire chapter (Chapter25) to accessibility design and
use.
2D API
The 2D API contains classes for implementing various painting styles, complex
shapes, fonts, and colors. This Java package is loosely based on APIs that were
licensed from IBM’s Taligent division. The 2D API classes are not part of Swing,
so they are not covered in this book.
Drag and Drop
Drag and Drop (DnD) is one of the more common metaphors used in graphical
interfaces today. The user is allowed to click and “hold” a GUI object, moving it
to another window or frame in the desktop with predictable results. The DnD
API allows users to implement droppable elements that transfer information
between Java applications and native applications. Although DnD is not part of
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
What Is Swing? | 3
Swing, it is crucial to a commercial-quality application. We tackle this topic in
Chapter24.
Figure1-1 enumerates the various components of the Java Foundation Classes.
Because part of the Accessibility API is shipped with the Swing distribution, we show
it overlapping Swing.
Is Swing a Replacement for AWT?
No. Swing is actually built on top of the core AWT libraries. Because Swing does not
contain any platform-specific (native) code, you can deploy the Swing distribution
on any platform that implements the Java 1.1.5 or above virtual machine. In fact, if
you have JDK 1.2or higher on your platform, then the Swing classes are already
available, and there’s nothing further to download. If you use a JDK version prior to
1.2, you can download the entire set of Swing libraries as a set of Java Archive (JAR)
files from the Swing home page,http://java.sun.com/products/jfc. In either case, it is
generally a good idea to visit this URL for any extra packages or L&Fs that may be
distributed separately from the core Swing libraries.
Figure1-2shows the relationship between Swing, AWT, and the Java Development
Kit in the 1.1 and higher JDKs. In JDK 1.1, the Swing classes must be downloaded
separately and included as an archive file on the classpath (swingall.jar).
* JDK 1.2
(and higher) comes with a Swing distribution.
Figure1-1.The five APIs of the JFC
* ThestandaloneSwingdistributionscontainseveralotherJARfiles.swingall.jariseverything(exceptthecon-
tents ofmulti.jar) wrapped into one lump and is all you normally need to know about. For completeness,
the other JAR files are:swing.jar, which contains everything but the individual L&F packages;motif.jar,
which contains the Motif (Unix) L&F;windows.jar, which contains the Windows L&F;multi.jar, which
contains a special L&F that allows additional (often nonvisual) L&Fss to be used in conjunction with the
primary L&F; andbeaninfo.jar, which contains special classes used by GUI development tools.
Java Foundation Classes
AWT Swing Accessibility Java
2D
Drag
and
Drop
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
4 | Chapter 1: Introducing Swing
Swing contains many more graphical components than its immediate predecessor,
AWT 1.1. Many are components that were scribbled on programmer wishlists since
Java first debuted—including tables, trees, internal frames, and a plethora of
advanced text components. In addition, Swing contains many design advances over
AWT. For example, Swing introduced an
Actionclass that makes it easier to coordi-
nate GUI components with their functionality. You’ll also find that a much cleaner
design prevails throughout Swing; this cuts down on the number of unexpected sur-
prises that you’re likely to face while coding.
Swing depends extensively on the event-handling mechanism of AWT 1.1, although
it does not define a comparatively large amount of events for itself. Each Swing com-
ponent also contains a variable number of exportable properties. This combination
of properties and events in the design was no accident. Each of the Swing compo-
nents, like the AWT 1.1 components before them, adhere to the popular JavaBeans
specification. As you might have guessed, this means that you can import all of the
Swing components into various GUI builder tools, which is useful for powerful
visual programming.
Rethinking the AWT
To understand why Swing exists, it helps to understand the market forces that drive
Java as a whole. The Java Programming Language was developed in 1993 and 1994,
largely under the guidance of James Gosling and Bill Joy at Sun Microsystems, Inc.
WhenSunreleasedtheJavaDevelopmentKitontheInternet,itignitedafirestormof
excitement that swept through the computing industry. At first, developers prima-
rily experimented with Java forapplets, mini-programs embedded in web browsers.
However, as Java matured over the course of the next two years, many developers
began using Java to develop full-scale applications.
Oratleasttheytried.AsdevelopersportedJavatomoreandmoreplatforms,itsweak
points started to show. The language was robust and scalable, extremely powerful as
Figure1-2.Relationships between Swing, AWT, and the JDK in the 1.1 and higher SDKs
AWT classes
JDK
CLASSPATH
Swing classes
swingall.jar
JDK 1.1
AWT classes
JFC
JDK 1.2 and higher
Swing classes
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
Swing Features | 5
a networking tool, and served well as an easy-to-learn successor to the more estab-
lished C++. The primary criticism, however, was that it was an interpreted language,
which means that by definition it executed code slower than its native, compiled
equivalents. Consequently, many developers flocked to just-in-time (JIT) compilers—
highly optimized interpreters—to speed up their large-scale applications. This solved
many problems, but one weak point that continually received scathing criticism was
the graphical widgets that Java was built on: the Abstract Window Toolkit (AWT).
The primary issue here was that AWT provided only the minimal amount of func-
tionality necessary to create a windowing application. For enterprise applications, it
quickly became clear that programmers needed something bigger.
After nearly a year of intense scrutiny, the AWT classes were ready for a change.
From Java 1.0 to Java 1.1, the AWT reimplemented its event model from a “chain”
design to an “event subscriber” design. This meant that instead of propagating
events through a predefined hierarchy of components, interested classes simply regis-
tered with other components to receive noteworthy events. Because events typically
involve only the sender and receiver, this eliminated much of the overhead in propa-
gating them. When component events were triggered, an event object was passed
only to those classes interested in receiving them.
Sun developers also began to see that relying on native widgets for the AWT compo-
nents was proving to be troublesome. Similar components looked and behaved dif-
ferently on many platforms, and coding for the ever-expanding differences of each
platform became a maintenance nightmare. In addition, reusing the component wid-
gets for each platform limited the abilities of the components and proved to be
expensive on system memory.
Clearly, Sun knew that AWT wasn’t enough. It wasn’t that the AWT classes didn’t
work; they simply didn’t provide the functionality necessary for full-scale enterprise
applications. At the 1997 JavaOne Conference in San Francisco, JavaSoft announced
the Java Foundation Classes. Key to the design of the JFC was that the new Swing
components would be written entirely in Java and have a consistent L&F across plat-
forms. This allowed Swing and the JFC to be used on any platform that supported
Java 1.1 or later; all the user had to do was to include the appropriate JAR files on
the
CLASSPATH to make each of the components available for use. Since JDK 1.2,
Swing has been part of the standard Java distribution; no special action is needed to
use Swing components.
Swing Features
Swing provides many features for writing large-scale applications in Java. Here is an
overview of some of the more popular features.
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
6 | Chapter 1: Introducing Swing
Pluggable Look-and-Feels
One of the most exciting aspects of the Swing classes is the ability to dictate the L&F
ofeachofthe components,evenresetting theL&F atruntime.L&Fshave become an
important issue in GUI development over the past 10 years. Many users are familiar
with the Motif style of user interface, which was common in Windows 3.1 and is still
in wide use on Unix platforms. Microsoft created a more optimized L&F in their
Windows 95/98/NT/2000 operating systems. In addition, the Macintosh computer
system has its own carefully designed L&F, which most Apple users feel comfortable
with.
SwingiscapableofemulatingseveralL&FsandcurrentlysupportstheWindows,Unix
Motif, and “native” Java Metal L&Fs. Mac OS X comes with full support for its own
L&FbasedonApple’sAquaHumanInterfaceGuidelines,althoughyoucanstillaccess
Metalifyouprefer.Inaddition,Swingallowstheuserto switchL&Fsatruntimewith-
out having to close the application. This way, a user can experiment to see which L&F
is best for her with instantaneous feedback. (In practice, nobody really does this, but
it’s still pretty cool from a geeky point of view.) And, if you’re feeling really ambitious
as a developer (perhaps a game developer), you can create your own L&F for each one
of the Swing components!
The Metal L&F combines some of the best graphical elements in today’s L&Fs and
even adds a few surprises of its own. Figure1-3 shows an example of several L&Fs
that you can use with Swing, including the Metal L&F. All Swing L&Fs are built
from a set of base classes called the Basic L&F. However, though we may refer to the
Basic L&F from time to time, you can’t use it on its own. If you’re lucky enough to
be developing applications in the Mac OS X environment, you’ll be familiar with the
L&F shown in Figure1-4.
Lightweight Components
Most Swing components are lightweight. In the purest sense, this means that compo-
nents are not dependent on native peers to render themselves. Instead, they use sim-
plified graphics primitives to paint themselves on the screen and can even allow
portions to be transparent.
The ability to create lightweight components first emerged in JDK 1.1, although the
majority of AWT components did not take advantage of it. Prior to that, Java pro-
grammers had no choice but to subclass
java.awt.Canvasorjava.awt.Panelif they
wished to create their own components. With both classes, Java allocated an opaque
peer object from the underlying operating system to represent the component, forc-
ing each component to behave as if it were its own window, thereby taking on a rect-
angular, solid shape. Hence, these components earned the name “heavyweight”
because they frequently held extra baggage at the native level that Java did not use.
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
Swing Features | 7
Heavyweight components were unwieldy for two reasons:
• Equivalent components on different platforms don’t necessarily act alike. A list
component on one platform, for example, may work differently than a list com-
ponent on another. Trying to coordinate and manage the differences between
components was a formidable task.
• The L&F of each component was tied to the host operating system and could
not be changed.
Figure1-3.Various L&Fs in the Java Swing environment
Metal
Look-and-Feel
Windows
Look-and-Feel
Motif
Look-and-Feel

This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
8 | Chapter 1: Introducing Swing
With lightweight components, each component renders itself using the drawing
primitives of theGraphicsobject (e.g.,drawLine(), fillRect(), etc.). Lightweight
components always render themselves onto the surface of the heavyweight top-level
component they are contained in. With the arrival of JDK 1.1, programmers can
directly extend the
java.awt.Componentorjava.awt.Containerclasses when creating
lightweight components. Unlikejava.awt.Canvasorjava.awt.Panel, these classes do
not depend on a native peer and allow the developer to render quickly to the graph-
ics context of the container. This results in faster, less memory-intensive compo-
nents than were previously available in Java.
Almost all of the Swing components are lightweight; only a few top-level containers
are not. This design allows programmers to draw (and redraw) the L&F of their
application at runtime, instead of tying it to the L&F of the host operating system. In
addition, the design of the Swing components supports easy modification of compo-
nent behavior. For example, you can tell almost any Swing component whether you
wish it to accept or decline focus and how it should handle keyboard input.
Additional Features
Several other features distinguish Swing from the older AWT components:
• Swing has wide variety of new components, such as tables, trees, sliders, spin-
ners, progress bars, internal frames, and text components.
• Swing components support the replacement of their insets with an arbitrary
number of nested borders.
• Swing components can havetooltipsplaced over them. A tooltip is a textual pop
up that momentarily appears when the mouse cursor rests inside the compo-
nent’s painting region. Tooltips can be used to give more information about the
component in question.
Figure1-4.The new Mac L&F in OS X

This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
Swing Features | 9
• You can arbitrarily bind keyboard events to components, defining how they
react to various keystrokes under given conditions.
• There is additional debugging support for rendering your own lightweight Swing
components.
We discuss each of these features in greater detail as we move through the next three
chapters.
How Can I Use Swing?
Not everyone uses Swing for the same reasons. In fact, the Swing libraries have many
levels of use, with varying levels of prerequisite knowledge. Here are some potential
uses:
• Use the Swing components as they are to build your own enterprise applications.
• Create your own Swing components—or extend those that already exist.
• Override or create a new L&F for one or more of the Swing components.
The first approach is what the vast majority of Swing programmers use. Here, using
Swing components is just like using the AWT components. A familiar set of compo-
nents, containers, and layout managers are all available in the Swing packages to help
you get your application up and running quickly. If you’re adept at AWT program-
ming, you probably need only a cursory introduction to each component to get
started. You will we need to get into broader issues only if you use some of the larger
andnewercomponentfamilies,suchastablesandtext.Ifyouareplanningtouseeach
component as a JavaBean for visual programming, you also fall into this category.
Creating your own component, or extending an existing one, requires a deeper
understanding of Swing. This includes a firm understanding of Swing architecture,
events, and lower-level classes. Also, if you decide to subclass a Swing component,
the responsibilities of that component must be adopted and handled accordingly—
otherwise, your new component may perform erratically.
Finally, you may wish to change the L&F of one or more Swing components. This is
arguably the most complex of the three routes that you can take—it requires a thor-
ough knowledge of the design, architectural fundamentals, and graphical primitives
of each lightweight component. In addition, you need to understand how Swing’s
UIManager andUIDefaults classes work together to “set” each component’s L&F.
This book strives to help you with each of these issues. Because we anticipate that
the vast majority of readers are in the first category, we spend a great deal of time
reviewing each component’s properties and methods, as well as providing source
code for various scenarios that use these components. We try to document and illus-
trate the useful parts of the components. The online documentation (called Javadoc)
has matured along with the rest of Java; the current stuff is always there first.
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
10 | Chapter 1: Introducing Swing
Programming your own L&F can get pretty complex; in fact, the source code for an
entire L&F would far exceed the size of this book. However, we don’t want to leave
you in the dark. If you are an experienced Swing programmer already, and you’re
looking for a concise introduction on how to get started, see Chapter26. This chap-
ter provides details on working with L&Fs as well as examples of how to code your
own L&F for both simple and complex Swing components.
Swing Packages and Classes
Here is a short description of each package in the Swing libraries:
javax.accessibility
Contains classes and interfaces that can be used to allowassistivetechnologiesto
interact with Swing components. Assistive technologies cover a broad range of
items, fromaudible textreadersto screen magnification.Although the accessibil-
ity classes are technically not part of Swing, they are used extensively through-
out the Swing components. We discuss the accessibility package in greater detail
in Chapter25.
javax.swing
Contains the core Swing components, including most of the model interfaces
and support classes.
javax.swing.border
Contains the definitions for the abstract border class as well as eight predefined
borders. Borders are not components; instead, they are special graphical ele-
ments that Swing treats as properties and places around components in place of
their insets. If you wish to create your own border, you can subclass one of the
existing borders in this package, or you can code a new one from scratch.
javax.swing.colorchooser
Contains support for theJColorChooser component, discussed in Chapter12.
javax.swing.event
Defines several new listeners and events that Swing components use to commu-
nicate asynchronous information between classes. To create your own events,
you can subclass various events in this package or write your own event class.
javax.swing.filechooser
Contains support for theJFileChooser component, discussed in Chapter12.
javax.swing.plaf
Defines the unique elements that make up the pluggable L&F for each Swing
component. Its various subpackages are devoted to rendering the individual
L&Fs for each component on a platform-by-platform basis. (Concrete imple-
mentations of the Windows and Motif L&Fs are in subpackages of
com.sun.
java.swing.plaf, and the Mac OS L&F is undercom.apple.mrj.swing.)
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
Swing Packages and Classes | 11
javax.swing.table
Provides models and views for the table component, which allows you to
arrange various information in a grid format with an appearance similar to a
spreadsheet. Using the lower-level classes, you can manipulate how tables are
viewed and selected, as well as how they display their information in each cell.
javax.swing.text
Provides scores of text-based classes and interfaces supporting a common design
known asdocument/view. The text classes are among the more advanced Swing
classes to learn, so we devote several chapters (19–23) to both the design funda-
mentals and the implementation of text applications.
javax.swing.text.html
Used specifically for reading and formatting HTML text through an ancillary
editor kit.
javax.swing.text.html.parser
Contains support for parsing HTML.
javax.swing.text.rtf
Used specifically for reading and formatting Rich Text Format (RTF) text
through an ancillary editor kit.
javax.swing.tree
Defines models and views for a hierarchal tree component, which may represent
a file structure or a series of properties.
javax.swing.undo
Contains the necessary functionality for implementing undoable functions.
By far the most widely used package isjavax.swing. In fact, almost all the Swing
components, as well as several utility classes, are located inside this package. The
only exceptions are borders and support classes for the trees, tables, and text-based
components. Because the latter components are much more extensible and often
have many more classes to work with, these classes have been divided into separate
packages.
Class Hierarchy
Figure1-5 shows a detailed overview of the Swing class hierarchy as it appears in the
1.4 SDK. At first glance, the class hierarchy looks very similar to AWT. Each Swing
component with an AWT equivalent shares the same name, except that the Swing
class is preceded by a capital J. In most cases, if a Swing component supersedes an
AWT component, it can be used as a drop-in replacement.
Upon closer inspection, however, you will discover that there are welcome differ-
ences between the Swing and AWT components. For example, the menu compo-
nents, including
JMenuBar, are now descendants of the same base component as the
others:JComponent. This is a change from the older AWT menu classes. Both the
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
12 | Chapter 1: Introducing Swing
AWT 1.0 and 1.1 menu classes inherited their own high-level component,
MenuComponent, which severely limited their capabilities. In addition, this design pre-
vented menu bars from being positioned with layout managers inside containers;
instead, Java simply attached menu bars to the top of frames.
Also, note that Swing has redesigned the button hierarchy. It now includes a
JToggleButtonclass, used in dual-state components. For example, if you click on a
toggle button while in the released position, the button switches to the pressed state
and remains in that state. When it is clicked again, the button returns to the released
state. Note that
JToggleButtonoutlines behavior seen in radio buttons and check-
boxes. Hence, these classes inherit fromJToggleButtonin the new Swing design. Also
note the addition of theJRadioButtonandJRadioButtonMenuItemclasses in Swing.
Until now, Java forced developers to use the AWT checkbox equivalent to mimic
radio buttons.
Figure1-5.The Swing component hierarchy
JApplet JDialog JFrame JWindow
JComponent
JComboBox JLabel JList JMenuBar
JPanel JPopupMenu JScrollBar JScrollPane
JTable JTree JInternalFrame JOptionPane
JProgressBar JRootPane JSeparator JSlider
JSplitPane JTabbedPane JToolBar JToolTip
JViewPort JColorChooser JSpinner (1.4)
JFileChooser JLayeredPane JTextArea
JDesktopPane JTextField
JCheckBox
JEditorPane
JToggleButton
JRadioButton
JTextPane
JButton
JMenu
JMenuItem
JRadioButtonMenuItem
JCheckButtonMenuItem
JTextComponent
AbstractButton
Top-level componets
JTableHeader
JPasswordField
JFormattedTextField
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
The Model-View-Controller Architecture | 13
You might have noticed an increase in the number of frames and panes in Swing. For
example, consider internal frames. Swing supports placing frames inside other
frames—this is commonly referred to as a multiple document interface (MDI) in the
Microsoft Windows world. You can assign these internal frames arbitrary vertical
layers; these layers determine which internal frame appears on top. In fact, even the
simplest frame,
JFrame, embraces the concept of layers by including support for lay-
ered panes on which you can position different elements of your application. These
topics are discussed in more detail in Chapters 9 and 11.
There are many other design enhancements in Swing—too many, in fact, to discuss
here. However, before we go on, we should discuss one of the fundamental designs
behind every Swing component: the model-view-controller architecture.
The Model-View-Controller Architecture
Swing uses themodel-view-controllerarchitecture(MVC) as the fundamental design
behind each of its components. Essentially, MVC breaks GUI components into three
elements. Each of these elements plays a crucial role in how the component behaves.
Model
The model encompasses the state data for each component. There are different
models for different types of components. For example, the model of a scrollbar
component might contain information about the current position of its adjust-
able “thumb,” its minimum and maximum values, and the thumb’s width (rela-
tive to the range of values). A menu, on the other hand, may simply contain a list
of the menu items the user can select from. This information remains the same
no matter how the component is painted on the screen; model data is always
independent of the component’s visual representation.
View
The view refers to how you see the component on the screen. For a good exam-
ple of how views can differ, look at an application window on two different GUI
platforms. Almost all window frames have a title bar spanning the top of the
window. However, the title bar may have a close box on the left side (like the
Mac OS platform), or it may have the close box on the right side (as in the Win-
dows platform). These are examples of different types of views for the same win-
dow object.
Controller
The controller is the portion of the user interface that dictates how the compo-
nent interacts with events. Events come in many forms—e.g., a mouse click,
gaining or losing focus, a keyboard event that triggers a specific menu com-
mand, or even a directive to repaint part of the screen. The controller decides
how each component reacts to the event—if it reacts at all.
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
14 | Chapter 1: Introducing Swing
Figure1-6 shows how the model, view, and controller work together to create a
scrollbar component. The scrollbar uses the information in the model to determine
how far into the scrollbar to render the thumb and how wide the thumb should be.
Note that the model specifies this information relative to the minimum and the max-
imum. It does not give the position or width of the thumb in screen pixels—the view
calculates that. The view determines exactly where and how to draw the scrollbar,
given the proportions offered by the model. The view knows whether it is a horizon-
tal or vertical scrollbar, and it knows exactly how to shadow the end buttons and the
thumb. Finally, the controller is responsible for handling mouse events on the com-
ponent. The controller knows, for example, that dragging the thumb is a legitimate
actionforascrollbar,withinthelimitsdefinedbytheendpoints,andthatpushingon
theendbuttonsisacceptableaswell.TheresultisafullyfunctionalMVCscrollbar.
MVC Interaction
With MVC, each of the three elements—the model, the view, and the controller—
requires the services of another element to keep itself continually updated. Let’s con-
tinue discussing the scrollbar component.
We already know that the view cannot render the scrollbar correctly without obtain-
ing information from the model first. In this case, the scrollbar does not know where
to draw its “thumb” unless it can obtain its current position and width relative to the
minimum and maximum. Likewise, the view determines if the component is the
recipient of user events, such as mouse clicks. (For example, the view knows the
exact width of the thumb; it can tell whether a click occurred over the thumb or just
outside of it.) The view passes these events on to the controller, which decides how
to handle them. Based on the controller’s decisions, the values in the model may
need to be altered. If the user drags the scrollbar thumb, the controller reacts by
incrementing the thumb’s position in the model. At that point, the whole cycle
Figure1-6.The three elements of a model-view-controller architecture
Model:
Minimum=0
Maximum=100
Value=15
Width=5
View: Controller:
Accept mouse
clicks on end
buttons
Accept mouse
drag on thumb

This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
The Model-View-Controller Architecture | 15
repeats. The three elements, therefore, communicate their data as shown in
Figure1-7.
MVC in Swing
Swing actually uses a simplified variant of the MVC design called themodel-delegate.
This design combines the view and the controller object into a single element, theUI
delegate, which draws the component to the screen and handles GUI events. Bun-
dling graphics capabilities and event handling is somewhat easy in Java, since much
of the event handling is taken care of in AWT. As you might expect, the communica-
tion between the model and the UI delegate then becomes a two-way street, as
shown in Figure1-8.
So let’s review: each Swing component contains a model and a UI delegate. The
model is responsible for maintaining information about the component’s state. The
UI delegate is responsible for maintaining information about how to draw the com-
ponent on the screen. In addition, the UI delegate (in conjunction with AWT) reacts
to various events that propagate through the component.
Figure1-7.Communication through the model-view-controller architecture
Figure1-8.With Swing, the view and the controller are combined into a UI-delegate object
Controller
The model passes
its data to the view
for rendering.
Model View
The controller
updates the model
based on the events
received.
The view determines
which events are passed
to the controller.
Controller
Model
View
UI-delegateComponent
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
16 | Chapter 1: Introducing Swing
Note that the separation of the model and the UI delegate in the MVC design is
extremely advantageous. One unique aspect of the MVC architecture is the ability to
tie multiple views to a single model. For example, if you want to display the same
datainapiechartandinatable,youcanbasetheviewsoftwocomponentsonasin-
gle data model. That way, if the data needs to be changed, you can do so in only one
place—the views update themselves accordingly (Chapter16 has an example that
does exactly this). In the same manner, separating the delegate from the model gives
the user the added benefit of choosing what a component looks like without affect-
ing any of its data. By using this approach, in conjunction with the lightweight
design, Swing can provide each component with its own pluggable L&F.
By now, you should have a solid understanding of how MVC works. However, we
won’t yet spoil the fun of using MVC. Chapters 2and 3 go into further detail about
how you can use MVC to your advantage in even the simplest of applications.
Working with Swing
Our introduction to Swing wouldn’t be complete unless we briefly mentioned some
caveats of the Swing libraries. There are two pertinent areas: multithreading and
lightweight versus heavyweight components. Being aware of these issues will help
you make informed decisions while working with Swing. Chapter28 gives you in-
depth guidance in these difficult areas.
Multithreading
Shortly before the initial release of Swing, Sun posted an article recommending that
developers not use independent threads to change model states in components.
*
Instead,once a componenthasbeen paintedtothe screen(or isabout tobepainted),
updates to its model state should occur only from theevent-dispatchingqueue. The
event-dispatching queue is a system thread used to communicate events to other
components. It posts GUI events, including those that repaint components.
The issue here is an artifact of the MVC architecture and deals with performance and
potential race conditions. As we mentioned, a Swing component draws itself based
on the state values in its model. However, if the state values change while the com-
ponent is in the process of repainting, the component may repaint incorrectly—this
is unacceptable. To compound matters, placing a lock on the entire model, as well as
on some of the critical component data, or even cloning the data in question, could
seriously hamper performance for each refresh. The only feasible solution, therefore,
is to place state changes in serial with refreshes. This ensures that modifications in
* Hans Muller and Kathy Walrath, “Threads and Swing,” The Swing Connection,http://java.sun.com/
products/jfc/tsc/swingdoc-archive/threads.html.
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
The Swing Set Demo | 17
component state do not occur at the same time Swing is repainting any components
and prevents race conditions.
The Z-Order Caveat: Lightweight
and Heavyweight Components
One of the most frequent issues to come out of lightweight/heavyweight component
use is the idea of depth, orz-order—that is, a well-defined method for how elements
are stacked on the screen. Because of z-order, it is not advisable to mix lightweight
and heavyweight components in Swing.
To see why, remember that heavyweight components depend on peer objects used at
the operating system level. However, with Swing, only the top-level components are
heavyweight:
JApplet, JFrame, JDialog, andJWindow. Also, recall that heavyweight
components are always “opaque”—they have a rectangular shape and are nontrans-
parent. This is because the host operating system typically allocates the entire paint-
ing region to the component, clearing it first.
Theremainingcomponents are lightweight.So hereisthe cruxofthe dilemma:when
a lightweight component is placed inside a heavyweight container, it shares (and
actually borrows) the graphics context of the heavyweight component. The light-
weight component must always draw itself on the same plane as the heavyweight
component that contains it; as a result, it shares the z-order of the heavyweight com-
ponent. In addition, lightweight components are bound to the clipping region of the
top-level window or dialog that contains them. In effect, lightweight components are
all “drawings” on the canvas of a heavyweight component. The drawings cannot go
beyond the boundaries of the canvas and can always be covered by another canvas.
Heavyweight components, however, are free from this restriction. Therefore, they
always appear on top of the lightweight components—whether that is the intent or
not.
Heavyweight components have other ramifications in Swing as well. They do not
work well in scrollpanes, where they can extend beyond the clipping boundaries;
they also don’t work in front of lightweight menus and menu bars (unless certain
precautions are taken) or inside internal frames. Some Swing classes, however, offer
an interesting approach to this problem. These classes allow you to specify whether
the component draws itself using a lightweight or a heavyweight window. Hence,
with a bit of judicious programming, you can keep your components correctly ren-
dered—no matter where they are located.
The Swing Set Demo
If you’re in a hurry to see all the components Swing has to offer, be sure to check out
the Swing Set demonstration. The demonstration is extremely easy to set up. If you
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
18 | Chapter 1: Introducing Swing
have the 1.3 or 1.4 SDK, the demonstration is included. If you have 1.2, you must
first download and extract the demo classes and add them to your classpath. Then
follow these steps:
1. Change the directory to thedemo/jfc/SwingSet2directory. (For the 1.2release,
the directory isdemo/jfc/SwingSet.)
2. Run the SwingSet2 (or SwingSet for 1.2) jar file:
% java -jar SwingSet2.jar
You should immediately see a splash screen indicating that the Swing Set demo is
loading. When it finishes, a window appears, similar to the one in Figure1-9.
This demo contains a series of tabs that demonstrate almost all of the components in
the Swing libraries. Be sure to check out the internal frames demo and the Metal
L&F. In addition, some of the Swing creators have added “Easter eggs” throughout
the Swing Set demo. See if you can find some!
Reading This Book
We’re well aware that most readers don’t read the Preface. You have our permission
to skip it, provided that you look at the Conventions section. That section is particu-
larly important because in this book we experiment with a few new techniques for
explaining the Swing classes. As we said earlier, everything in Swing is a JavaBean.
Figure1-9.The Swing Set demo

This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
Reading This Book | 19
This means that much of an object’s behavior is controlled by a set of properties,
which are manipulated by accessor methods. For example, the propertycoloris
accessed by thegetColor()(to find out the color) andsetColor()(to change the
color) methods. If a property has a boolean value, the get method is often replaced
by an is method; for example, the
visibleproperty would have theisVisible()and
setVisible() methods.
We found the idea of properties very powerful in helping us understand Swing.
Therefore, rather than listing all of a class’s accessor methods, we decided to present
a table for each class, listing the class’s properties and showing the property’s data
type, which accessor methods are present, whether the property is “bound” (i.e.,
changing the property generates a
PropertyChangeEvent), when it was introduced (1.2
is the default; 1.3 and 1.4 are marked where appropriate), and the property’s default
value. This approach certainly saves paper (you didn’t really want a 2,000-page
book, did you?) and should make it easier to understand what a component does
and how it is structured. Furthermore, if you’re not already in the habit of thinking
in terms of the JavaBeans architecture, you should get in the habit. It’s a very power-
ful tool for understanding component design.
The conventions we use in the property tables—plus some other conventions that
we use in class diagrams—are explained in the Preface. So you may ignore the rest of
the Preface as long as you familiarize yourself with the conventions we’re using.
The next chapter helps AWT developers get a jump on Swing by presenting a simple
application; those without AWT experience may just want to skim the chapter. In
Chapter3, we continue our discussion by presenting some of the fundamental
classes of Swing and discribing how you can use the features inherent in each of
these classes to shorten your overall development time. Don’t stop now—the best is
yet to come!
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
20
Chapter2In this chapter:
• Upgrading Your AWT Programs
• A Simple AWT Application
• Including Y our First Swing
Component
• Beyond Buttons
• What Is an Internal Frame?
• A Bigger Application
CHAPTER 2
Jump-Starting a Swing
Application
Now that you have an overview of Swing, let’s look at a few Swing components you
can put into your applications right now. This chapter shows you how to add images
to buttons and how to create a rudimentary Swing application using internal frames.
We won’t belabor the theory and background. You’ll find everything we talk about
now (and tons more we don’t discuss here) presented in later chapters in much
greater detail. We just want to show you some of the fun stuff right away.
This chapter, and only this chapter, assumes that you have prior experience with
AWT and AWT-based programs that you’d like to upgrade to use lightweight Swing
components. If you are new to Java, this may not be the case; you are probably inter-
ested in learning Swing without the need to upgrade AWT applications. You can
either skim this chapter or skip ahead to Chapter 3, which lays a foundation for the
rest of your work in Swing.
If you want to see how easily Swing components can be dropped into existing AWT
applications, though, read on.
Upgrading Your AWT Programs
One of the benefits of object-oriented languages is that you can upgrade pieces of a
program without rewriting the rest. While practice is never as simple as theory, with
Swing it’s close. You can use most of the Swing components as drop-in replace-
ments for AWT components with ease. The components sport many fancy new fea-
tures worth exploiting, but they still maintain the functionality of the AWT
components you’re familiar with. As a general rule, you can stick a “J” in front of
your favorite AWT component and put the new class to work as a Swing compo-
nent. Constructors for components such as
JButton, JTextField, andJListcan be
used with the same arguments and generate the same events asButton, TextField,
andList. Some Swing containers, likeJFrame, take a bit of extra work, but not much.
This is the Title of the Book, eMatter Edition
Copyright © 2008 O’Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.
A Simple AWT Application | 21
Graphical buttons are essential to modern user interfaces. Nice monitors and cheap
hardware have made icons almost a necessity. The AWT package in Java does not
directly support image buttons. You could write an extension to support them easily
enough, but why bother when Swing’s
JButtonclass provides a standard way to add
image buttons?
A Simple AWT Application
You probably have some programs lying around that use regular AWT buttons that
you’d love to replace with image buttons, but you don’t have the time or, honestly,
the necessity to produce your own image button class. Let’s look at a simple applica-
tion that demonstrates an upgrade path you can use on your own programs.
First, let’s look at the code for this very simple application:
// ToolbarFrame1.java
// A simple frame containing a "toolbar" made up of several java.awt.Button
// objects. We'll be converting the Buttons to JButtons in the ToolbarFrame2.java
// file.
//
import java.awt.*;
import java.awt.event.*;
public class ToolbarFrame1 extends Frame {
  Button cutButton, copyButton, pasteButton;
  public ToolbarFrame1() {
    super("Toolbar Example (AWT)");
    setSize(450, 250);
    addWindowListener(new WindowAdapter() {
      public void windowClosing(WindowEvent e) {
        System.exit(0);
      }
    });
    ActionListener printListener = new ActionListener() {
      public void actionPerformed(ActionEvent ae) {
        System.out.println(ae.getActionCommand());
      }
    };
    Panel toolbar = new Panel();
    toolbar.setLayout(new FlowLayout(FlowLayout.LEFT));
    cutButton = new Button("Cut");
    cutButton.addActionListener(printListener);
    toolbar.add(cutButton);
    copyButton = new Button("Copy");
    copyButton.addActionListener(printListener);
    toolbar.add(copyButton);
